So let's go through some examples of
ways in which things can go right and
things can go wrong.
So my colleagues wrote
this wonderful paper
exactly about the issue of using your
data to come up with your hypotheses.
They work in the area
of Multiple Sclerosis.
And a common problem in the area of
Multiple Sclerosis brain research with
magnetic resonance imaging which is what
they work on is actually defining what it
means for a lesion which is one
of the hallmarks of the disease,
a brain lesion to be so-called enhancing,
so
it's sort of getting a greater
amount of blood in the area.
So, they put forward
a framework necessarily because
the hypotheses weren't clear, they put
forward a framework that both identified
the hypotheses and interrogated
the hypotheses with the same data set.
And of course they're
statistical researchers so
their emphasis was on doing
this in a rigorous fashion.
But it's just an example
of a setting where
the hypotheses just couldn't immediately
be come up with in a clear fashion and
so the data had to perform double duty of
both coming up with the hypotheses and
interrogating those hypotheses.
Multiple comparisons.
Since we're on the subject of brain
imaging, which is the area that I work on,
multiple comparisons is often an issue,
and in one particularly famous example,
some people put a dead
salmon in an fMRI machine,
which is there to detect brain activation.
And of course there's no brain
activation in a dead salmon.
And what they found is that if you do
lots and lots and lots of tests, and
you don't account for that correctly, you
can see brain activation in a dead salmon.
A very famous example of randomization
that occurred kind of recently,
at least in the past decade,
was from the Women's Health Initiative.
The Women's Health Initiative conducted
a study, a randomized trial of
hormone replacement therapy, which at the
time was a fairly standard treatment for
post-menopausal women.
The results of these randomized trials
contradicted what was thought of as common
knowledge for the efficacy of hormone
replacement therapy and the safety of it.
And so it brought about a lot
soul-searching about the value
of randomized trial versus the value
of a lot of observational data.
And I think it's maybe not necessary
to go into the weeds of this study
for the purposes of this lecture.
However, suffice it to say, the randomized
trial carried a lot of weight with it
because of the randomization.
All the previous observational trials
where they just saw whether or
not women were on hormone replacement
therapy and watched them over time.
The multitude of those studies was
not deemed as rigorous as the one
study that had randomization,
where women were actually randomized
to hormone replacement therapy or not.
And as a side note, if you're
interested about reading up on hormone
replacement therapy, I put a website
here from the Women's Health Initiative
where you can actually go and
look on the frequently
asked questions relating to some of
the studies that have done since then.
There's been a decade of
work since then to further
refine the science on
this particular issue.
The main point for
this lecture is how important
randomization was In
this particular setting.
So here's an example of a study
that I was involved in,
where you can't actually
measure what you'd like to.
So in two ways in this study,
you can't measure what you'd like to.
So my colleague,
Susan Bassett, was interested
in studying Alzheimer's disease.
And what she'd really like to know is,
well before people have Alzheimer's
disease, what do their brains look like
with regard to these functional
magnetic resonance imaging scans?
So well before it, and that would be very
useful, because if you could see that
there were some changes in the brain
well before people developed symptoms,
maybe you could treat it.
So this is a big deal actually
in Alzheimer's research,
is trying to find precursors for
the disease.
So there's two problems that
occur with respect to measurement
in this particular study.
First of all, the fMRI machine doesn't
actually measure brain activation.
It measures a proxy for brain
activation through blood oxygenation.
So it actually, we can't actually
measure in living humans to the spatial
extent that we'd like, the brain
activation in the way that we'd like.
So there's one sense that the technology
just can't measure exactly what we'd like,
it only measures a proxy.
But, let's put that to the side and
then talk about another way in which
we're not measuring what we like.
We can't know in advance who's
going to get Alzheimer's disease,
we can only guess.
And so in this case what she
looked at was people who
were at very high familial risks.
They had affected siblings, or affected
parents, multiple affected siblings and
affected parents and
then in the other group they had
people with no affected siblings and
affected parents.
But that doesn't mean that everyone
in the familial risk group
is gonna contract Alzheimer's disease.
Quite the opposite,
relatively small fraction of them has.
And that doesn't mean no one in the other
group is going to contract Alzheimer's
disease, and some of them did, eventually.
This was a long study, over 15 years.
So later on they saw some results for
people who actually converted.
But the point being here that she can't
actually measure what she needs to.
She can't prospectively measure
who's going to contract this disease
in the future.
Because if you did, the problem
wouldn't be worth studying, right?
That's everything that you'd like to do.
So the measurement is a very
clear problem in this case and
what you have to combat this
with is giant sample sizes.
You just having a greater percentage
of likely people that are gonna get
Alzheimer's disease in the one group and
a smaller percentage in the other group.
And you need a much larger
sample size to account for
the fact that you're going to see
much smaller effects from the fewer
people of eventual disease
type in the one group and
the fewer people of control
type in the other group.
So, again, this just serves as an example
where the measurement that you'd
like to have,
isn't the measurement that you get.
And this is very common in
data science experiments and
you need to work around it.
Just like Susan in this case did by
conducting one of the largest fMRI
experiments that anyone had seen at
the time, just to combat this issue.
So in this class we're gonna dig through
various facets of the perfect data science
experience versus real life.
And we'll use this idea of what's
ideal versus what tends to happen
as our launching point for
all of our discussions.
And we'll give some practical
recommendations for
the messy situations and
how you can manage
the people doing the data analysis if
it's not you and you're the manager.
How you can manage and help direct
them to different solutions for
this collection of various problems
that arise in data analysis.
So welcome to the class, and
we look forward to seeing you in it.